Okay. We, as former students, could also tie this
to the gravity of the situation as far as A&M was
concerned, and specifically the cadet corps. In
any case, a
couple of days after that it had been straightened
out, and they resumed their functioning. Their
resignation had never been accepted, of course.
But they did not give on the policy. That stuck. In
other words, hazing was diminished? Hazing was
diminished. And in fact, or just in... Well, I
think we got into this rather deeply earlier in our
discussions. And again, I go back. You've got to
allow these cadet commanders to run their
outfits. And you can't have someone there all the
time supervising them. You'll destroy what
organization you have if you tried to observe them
all the time, instruct them all the time. I think,
in general, that that policy did stick. I'm sure
there were exceptions. What they're trying to do
is reduce physical hurt hazing.
But of course, another part of it was to get it into
focus so that particularly the freshmen weren't
distracted too much of the time from what they're
there basically to do. But in my opinion, when you
reduce one form, there's going to be something
else increase a bit. And as long as those cadet
commanders are conscientious in guarding the
time that their freshmen and sophomores need to do
their studies and guard their rights as we used to
have it between recall and taps at 11 o'clock.
Most of them are going to say to it that the hazing is
not going to be too destructive.
It's awfully hard to order a specific change in
policy for an activity in the cadet corps because
you don't have
the means to go beyond that cadet commander to do
anything about it. So you've got to have
confidence in him that he understands it and in
good faith is going to do something about it. And
that's why they made such a point of resistance
here. Instead of accepting the policy and
ignoring it, they said, we object to this and we
want you to reconsider. Then
when they came back and said we'll put our officers
insignia back on and function, they were saying,
in effect, okay, we accept the policy and that
means that we've got to do something about it. When
you and two others addressed these students, what
kind of response did they give you? They were in an
emotional state when this incident occurred,
highly emotional.
They listened politely. I didn't know at the time
whether we'd been very effective or not.
One of my cohorts became very emotional about it.
They were very serious about it, long faces. And I
could see question marks on many of those faces. A
very effective cadet leader had really, you might
say, crystallized their action in a rather sudden
way.
But I think as those days went by and the
implications were known, and their own personal
situation We're known, and I'm sure they got a lot
back from Daddy very quickly, particularly the
ex-Aggy Daddies. Sure. As I say, I'm not sure that
this meeting was critical in the process, but I
think it helped. And you made known the Army's view
of this insubordination. Well, of course. We made
known the implications to that. from the
standpoint of the Army. The Army can't tolerate
this sort of thing. They're under contract with
them. And there are repercussions that this
behavior could have on their careers. And no
matter what or who attempted to defend those
cadets, they were in a defenseless position.
They can't realize that. And how were relations
between the staff and the student cadets after
this episode? I don't think this really affected
too much. Naturally, they looked to the
commandant as the key man involved as far as the
military staff was concerned. And to his credit,
President Gilchrist made it clearly known this
was his policy. So it didn't affect too much.
the relationship between the staff and the
cadets. And I think they all respected Colonel
Malloy very much. I don't think he lost any respect
over it. I think, you know, we always have one gripe
about somebody in a case like that, and I imagine
they did more griping about him than any other one
in uniform, but that's because he was the cook in
the kitchen. How had Texas A&M changed in the six or
seven years that you had been absent? Well, I think
the major change, of course, had been in the cadet
corps because it was decimated by the war. No fault
at A&M. That was the major change. And, of course,
the student body wasn't too hefty. I forget how
many we had in that cadet corps at that time, but it
wasn't very big. It grew rapidly when the war was
over, and we had probably the most significant
change that I saw was
two, one of which was very pleasing and one of which
was displeasing.
We had this great input of veterans, many of whom
had been drafted and served. Many of them had been
drafted out of A&M. Served as enlisted men, came
back, got in the cadet corps, and were
commissioned when they left. But the remarkable
thing about them was that A&M or no other
institution, I suppose, had ever seen the
industry on the part of a body of students that they
showed. And their grade achievement was
unbelievable. The bell curve just had to be thrown
out the window.
because there were so many of them up there, you
know, pay students. And so that was a,
of course, that was a very good thing. That
academic average is way up, and you can imagine the
effect it had on the youngsters who were in the
classrooms with these. Of course, many of them
came with wives, and the GI Bill was, seeing them
through, and that's a great thing.
The other thing that was such a drastic change from
the A&M that I had known, the cadet corps I'd known,
and of course in my day when you thought of A&M you
thought of the cadet corps because they were the
student body, was that the president made the
decision in order to really get a hold of this
hazing
to put all the freshmen out at Bryan Field. That was
my second year there. I believe it was the second
year.
I was assigned as the PMST of Bryan Field. I was
assigned as the PMS&T of the freshmen. And Luke
Harrison, who was an ex-Aggie and was on the staff
at A&M, was assigned as the commandant
representative.
Dean Harrington was the, you might say, he was the
dean of the freshmen at Bryan Field. Later
succeeded by
my great friend,
Dr. Abbott was the successor to Dean Herring when
he was made president of the university. But this
was an extremely interesting thing, even though I
disapproved it personally. I lived out there,
lived in the little old apartment in the old
hospital building at Bryant Field. And these
cadets lived in those old barracks and went to
school in the mess halls and offices. had their
classrooms there, we did their military
practical exercises, training, drills,
freshman commanding freshman. We appointed
acting officers from among the freshmen who'd had
ROTC training in high
school. appointed drill days, we call it. In other
words, the military science course required them
to be instructed by the military staff
in the practical exercises, usually one
afternoon a week. Senior cadet officers from the
main campus would come and work with them on that
drill day.
I guess the most interesting aspect of it was how
hard those freshmen tried to be good. I mean, to
accomplish what they were asked to do. And they
became excellent in close order drill because
they actually would go out and drill more extra
time than they would have if they'd been on the main
campus and the drill times called by their
commanders.
And they wanted to be good fish. And they were just
as disappointed to be out there, of course, as the
upperclassmen back at the campus were.
Displeased that they weren't there. Why was the
order put out that they had to stay out there? It was
the hazing problem. Oh. So they wanted to separate
the fish. They wanted to just separate. This was
Dr. Gilchrist's idea. Just completely separate
the freshmen, and that would interrupt this
hazing bit, see? That was the basic reason for it.
One thing we
did, and let's see, I was there I guess two years
with those freshmen. And that first year, really
they had time on their hand. They did a lot of this
extra drilling, but somehow one freshman came to
me. or a group of them came to me, led by a freshman
from Dallas, who later became the cadet colonel,
by the way, asking if they could form a freshman
drill team.
And I told them I thought it was a good idea, but I'd
want to know if they felt they could train
themselves, because it would be very difficult to
have a non-commissioned officer from the main
campus come out there every day to work with them.
They said they assured me that they could do it. And
so they wanted us something distinctive for their
uniform, and we planned all this and got approval
for it and formed that thing. Well, as you know,
that freshman drill team has won national
competition. Nearly every time it's competed in
recent years. I know when I was in Washington, I say
recent years, and when I was in Washington, the
last three or four years I was in Washington, they
came to Washington for the competition and won
each time. So I, of course, bear pride. Because I
was an observer of the creation of this thing. They
created it themselves. And thank goodness the
authorities come and approved it. And
incidentally, I think that was another effort to
show their excellence. And the first time they
were seen by the cadet corps as a whole was at the
next spring, at the spring football game, you
know, the inter-squad game. At halftime, we had it
set up for this
And it was kind of funny and it was kind of
emotional, too. When they took to the field, they
were announced over the loudspeaker system, and
when they took to the field, there were boos and the
waving of the white handkerchief, and that's an
insult to an Aggie, you know. That's the sign we
give the tea sippers. But
they were so good. You see, they'd been training
several months, and the only people who'd ever
seen them had been those cadet officers that came
out there to work with certain units. But anyway,
they were so good when they finished that that
whole student body just took to their feet. It was
really something. So they were solid then. They
were in. And it did a lot to...
You know, if the
main student body's proud of them, it kind of makes
them apart. Sure, absolutely. So that was sort of a
joining of the fish to the main corps. Now, when the
veterans came back from the Second World War, they
did not have to join the corps. I'm sure some of them
Some of them didn't want to join the Corps after
being a veteran of the Second World War. What was
the relationship between the young student in the
Corps and the veteran? Well, it's true that the
veterans, they didn't have to wear the uniform.
They didn't have to live in the Corps.
Most of them were very respectful of the Corps.
And, of course, the Corps was very respectful of
them. I think there were some on the part of all of us
who were accustomed to looking at that student
body. There were some that didn't like the idea of
all those civilian clothes on the campus. But I
don't think there was any resentment of those
veterans at all. I wanted to really respect for
them. And I think it was understood they should
have that privilege of not being in the It was
interesting, though, how many chose to be and how
many chose to complete their military training
there for a commission.
A high percentage, do you think? I really don't
know what the percentage was, but I could just tell
from my own classes, my first and last year there. I
was at Bryanfield this year. I was on the campus two
years. I was just Bryanfield one year. We'd have a
good number. good percentage in the in our classes
but what percentage of the veterans it was I don't
know now you had been a student of course at A&M and
now you came back as an instructor what what'd you
think of that new role that was very interesting
revealing and somewhat disillusioning can you
explain yeah I say that I say that uh respectfully
But the reason, perhaps I'd better say the
disillusioning first. The disillusionment was
that as I went through there as a student and a cadet
and an appointed cadet leader,
I came to know many of the, of course, well, many of
the senior officials of the college, the
presidents and the deans and committees and so
forth.
and I held them in awe and great respect and I still
do and to me they were just sort of a
a model of
fine men leading a fine purpose in a fine way and all
of them perfect gentlemen all of them perfect in
their understanding of cadets and everything
else that goes on there. But when I came back on the
staff and got to competing for funds for this
activity for the cadet corps,
for classrooms that would meet this requirement
and so on and so on, I found that they'll fight just
as hard for their territory as those deans will, as
they will defend the school as a whole. I came to see
a bit of politics at work, and I guess that's
natural. I never, of course, recognized that
politics were working in the university when I was
a student. Politics is not bad, but it's a little
disappointing when you feel that maybe old Dean
so-and-so is not looking beyond his desk when he's
trying to get this done and so forth and so on. So,
that extended a little bit. as a whole. What way was
it satisfying? Well, the most satisfying thing
was to be working with the Cadet Corps, not just
training them in what we were there to train them
in, but to get them back on the road and rebuilt. It
was a matter of rebuilding with new material
because the material had been taken away. That was
very satisfying. Sounds like it was successful
also. I think it was. I've of course been It's been
very painful to me to see the cadet corps steadily
recede to a minuscule part of the student body that
from just at a distance you can hardly observe
them. I'm sure they're more significant on the
campus than that, but I hope that we can see a
regrowth in the cadet corps simply because it's
good. It's good for the boys. the men that get in it.
It's good for the country to have the product of it,
and the state.
But we did, I think, do a pretty good job. We had a
very fine, two fine commandants while I was there,
and very fine staff. Very well prepared officers
that were carefully selected to come in there
those early years after World War II. It worked.
Now what were your feelings when you were
reassigned
and when you were reassigned to go to, you said you
went to work college. No, you went to Venezuela
right from there. Went to Venezuela, uh huh. It was
after that, yeah. What were your feelings about
leaving A&M? Well, I was ready to go because you
know three years is a pretty good normal tour and as
a matter of fact anytime you leave a job you You look
back and say, well, is there something that I
haven't accomplished that should be
accomplished? I'm sure at A&M there's always more
to accomplish, but the basic thing we undertook
had been put well on the road. So I didn't feel that I
need another year to see my part of this finished.
And I look forward to going to Venezuela, because
when that job, I was first called on the phone to ask
me if I'd like to have this particular job. to go to
Venezuela with the mission of joining the U.S.
Army mission there and for my job create an
artillery school in Venezuela. And it was a
fascinating idea to me. And of course the reason
they called me because my record showed I'd had
Spanish in school.
asked to be sent to the Army Language School
because my Spanish had never been good, and my
vocabulary had disappeared. And they said, no,
it's urgent. If you insist on going to language
school, forget it. So I forgot it. Went on as was,
and it turned out to be a very interesting
experience.
I'm moving toward Venezuela now, and I was
wondering, you were the You were the assistant
field artillery advisor. Who was your chief, your
boss? Colonel John Casey was the senior
artilleryman there. He was also deputy chief of
mission. Colonel Marsh was the chief of mission.
In other words, the commander. So Colonel Casey
really functioned primarily as chief of mission.
I mean, deputy chief of mission. And he really
never was active in the working with the artillery
units of Venezuela. That was basically mine,
working with the units and getting this artillery
school started. Okay, let's talk about that. We
were talking a little bit about that last night.
Yeah, well, it was a very interesting challenge,
of course, because I think as a matter of
background and focus, we ought to point out that
this was 1949, late 49, that I arrived there. World
War II is just really still in view in the past. Many
of the Latin American countries had wanted to
contribute to the war in some way, but none of them
really provided effective fighting forces.
Brazil, as I recall, is the only country in Latin
America that fielded an expeditionary force, and
they did very little. They arrived late in the
European theater and didn't do much. I think they
went to Italy, as I recall. I believe that, no one
told me this, but I believe that having been
through that experience of World War II and seeing
how ineffective they were, that the Latin
American governments were very conscious of the
need that they probably should do something to
modernize their military forces in case of need.
And that they were very receptive to a suggestion,
by the way, from the United States that we put a
military training mission in, I think, in nearly
every country down there. We proposed that and it
was accepted. And I think though the main, one of
the reasons that we proposed it was, if I
understand it correctly, that we didn't want the
history of post World War I repeated.
After World War I, vast numbers of discharged
German officers went to South America, and they
became an influence in those armed forces down
there. And for you to see that, all you have to do is
look at their uniforms today. And if you can see a
movie of a parade in most any Latin American
country, even today, that influence is still
visible, and most emphatically, by the way they do
the goose step when they pass the reviewing stand.
That came from Germany. So anyway, there were also
Italian officers and so forth in there. And there
was sort of a mix. Most of them there is private,
retired, or discharged individual. But
nevertheless, the influence was there. And so we
replaced that influence and set out to
advise and assist in modernizing armed forces of
those Latin American countries. At the same time,
when we back off and look at it, and even when I was
there I could see it, at the same time our
government and the State Department was making
judgments on really how modern or how much should
these countries have, how much modernity and how
much equipment and what kinds. They resented
that. It was hard to see, I guess, that there was any
external threat to Latin America. They were not
prone to ally among themselves. In fact, more
prone to fight among themselves, although
there's been no serious fight for decades among
them. But I could see, as an observer in Venezuela,
that the Venezuelans' officers felt that someday
they were probably going to have to fight
Colombia. or someday they're probably going to
have to fight Guayana.
I guess when they look around their borders,
Brazil was, there's so much jungle between them
and the nearest road to Brazil that that wasn't a
worry, but their other neighbors were. So anyway,
our efforts- What about the threat of communism? I
beg your pardon? What about the threat of
communism? At the time I was there, it was not
significant at all. Not as significant at all.
This occurred subsequently, that threat. But I
think in the form of general comments, again, it
was a little bit frustrating to be there to
convince the Venezuelans that we could help them
modernize and make them effective armed forces
and then have their request for Venezuela could
buy. They had the money. That oil and iron and
everything. To be refused by the State Department
an order of cannon or fighter aircraft or
whatever, Navy ships, it just didn't seem to make
much sense to the Venezuelans. They resented
that. They resented it. It seemed clear to me that
the leadership in Venezuela was also conscious of
the fact that, aside from this stepbrother
position they were in vis-a-vis the United
States, that we didn't seem very important to
them. They didn't seem very important to us. They
got that impression.
important matters of national security or
international security and international
affairs and economic affairs were elsewhere we
took for granted the economic relationships and
we also took for granted the dominance of the
political relationship our dominant position
that's the way they viewed it but where we had money
to go in to help people it was primarily in europe
and where we had strategic considerations to
really come to grips with outside of Latin
America. It was in Europe and in the East. So those
people aren't unlearned
down there, and they're pretty intelligent
people, and I think they found it very difficult to
remain good allies. as opposed now, and not
opposed, but it's easier for them to be good trade
partners because it's just natural that we trade
together.
So anyway, that was the atmosphere in which I
worked. But my job was a very fixed and simple one.
And the complexities were small, but many. The job
was to get an artillery school established and
they never had one. I was surprised to learn after I
got down there that they didn't have a basis to
spring from, a base to spring from. They didn't
really have a trained artillery branch. They had
nothing that resembled a school. They had nothing
that resembled a universal artillery training
program for advancing officers in their
capabilities.
And therefore, this school concept started with
me. Well, that makes you feel pretty
self-conscious, you know, and feel the
responsibility of it. So, I'd been there, got
there in September of 49, and in November, the G3 of
the Armed forces called me in. He's the one that, of
course, had planned this, and asked me if I would
start a little informal class there at the
Ministry of Defense with some artillery officers
just to get started. The Venezuelan G3?
Venezuelan G3. And the idea, I guess, as much as
anything else, would get me prepared, which made
sense. But I told him, well, you know, my Spanish
isn't very good. He's very good in English. I've
got some Spanish to learn. And also, since I've
gotten here and seen what has to be done, I have
written to Port Sale, Oklahoma for lesson
material so that we can start a course. We can
design one for our needs here and get it going. But I
said, the main problem right now is the language.
But if you'll give me a translator and allow that
you know, extra time it takes, sure, I'll get
something going. He said, oh, no, our policy is
there'll be no translators in any of the classes. I
said, well, then it seems to me that you're going to
have to give me a little more time to get prepared.
He said, oh, I think you can do it. You know, I said,
you can do it. And we need to get going. So I didn't
argue the matter. I took it to my chief, the
missions. At that time, it wasn't Colonel Marsh.
At that time, it was Colonel Marsh's predecessor,
who was very fluent in Spanish, beautifully,
spoke it beautifully. And I presented the
problem, and I fully expected that he'd support
me, and we'd get this thing into reason. He said,
well, I think you can do it. So there I was. Anyway,
all I tell this for you is that it really forced me to
get that Spanish or go home. It's that simple.
Well, as you know, Spanish is probably the easiest
language in the world to learn and use. But
anybody's got to have a vocabulary. Sure. It's
easy to drive nails, but you've got to have nails.
So what did you do? So what we did was start this
little course, and I went over every other day for
two hours. This gave me a lot of time to struggle
with it. I would do my lesson plans, have the
mission translator translated into Spanish. I
would study it. I would rewrite it in the Spanish
that I felt I could use. And I'd try my best to
memorize
it. And I'd make a little series of rites or
exercises to be done with paper
I had to have some other means than my Spanish.
Well, this went on from late November until March
of the next year. 1950. By March, I didn't have to
use the translator. I didn't have to memorize the
Spanish. I had learned, relearned my basic
grammar and Of course, I never lost the
pronunciation.
And I had acquired a pretty decent military
vocabulary, which was new to me in any case. Then in
March, we started, that was just sort of a
makeshift course. The same officers then joined.
How many were there? There were about eight
officers, a small group. It turned out it was a very
wise thing to do. I wouldn't have gotten prepared
any other way under those policies. So in March we
started the first full-time,
not full-time, the first everyday series course.
For two hours every day? This was two hours every
day. Plus, on certain days we'd have exercises
that would take a whole half a day. They had a little
place called El Valle, the valley, in which there
was a small military installation. And it was a
little military reservation. And we could shoot
the 105 howitzers in there. We had very short
minimum ranges. We could hardly shoot over 2,000
yards in a very narrow corridor, and therefore, a
very small selection of targets to practice them
on. But we could get the mechanics in, and we could
get the guns. So you could give them some
on-the-job training. So we could give them some
practical training.
few officers in this class, including most of
those who were in that first class. And about
halfway through this course, which ran until that
fall,
two young officers, lieutenants, returned from
the United States Artillery School. And they
assisted me, not full time. They had other jobs,
but they'd assist me. classes but I was the
instructor then when that training was finished
we went to the field that year first time I guess
they've done a field exercise in true sense in
their careers and well that's a long story of how we
found it but we found a beautiful piece of terrain
out in the hinterland about 150 kilometers from
Caracas
it would have been a credit to any service school.
It was just terrain that individuals in the
government owned some of it, but just wasn't
occupied. Minimal roads into it, as you might
imagine. And we spent, all told, three weeks out
there applying what these young, what these
people had been trained to do in artillery. And our
old saying in the artillery is, what you've got to
learn is how to shoot, move, and communicate. But
in order to do those things effectively, you've
got to be out in the field to do it. On maneuvers.
That's right. Well, it was highly successful from
their point of view for several reasons. One, it
went very well. They found that they could do the
things that they'd been trained to do. in the
classroom and in that little practical exercise
area to do.
They were the only school class in the Venezuelan
Army that got to go to their field exercise. They'd
been planned for the other branches too, but the
dictator President Delgado Chabot had been
assassinated just in a few months, a few weeks, I
guess, before we were supposed to go. And again,
this G3 felt that we should go because we were ahead
of the others. But all the others were canceled
because of that incident. And so that kind of made
these artillerymen feel they were ahead, too.
Furthermore, the succeeding dictator, Paris
Jimenez, came out for the final exercise, and he
was so impressed. Because it's not that it was...
So absolutely excellent, but it was so far beyond
what they'd ever known before. He was so
impressed, and we did a full blue shoot and
communicate exercise for him with a very
impressive artillery fire for him to observe. He
ordered that next year there would be a combined
field exercise mission. infantry supported by
artillery and engineers and signal and with armor
they had an armored battalion or two and so
actually the next year we did that but as far as the
course and the artillery school was concerned
after that first year of training and winding up
with that initial field exercise then the
artillery school of Venezuela was formally
chartered And we took
Major
Jose Quevedo to be the commandant. He was promoted
to lieutenant colonel. He was one of the three
majors in that first course. I was his advisor. The
two young officers who'd been trained at Fort Sill
were put on the teaching staff, along with Were
those Venezuelans? They were Venezuelans.
Along with the Venezuelan officers from that
first course who were outstanding.
And then we had the first full-time course. Run by
the Venezuelans. Run by the Venezuelans. And this
full-time course, as was the one that I taught you,
And as all the courses in the Venezuelan Army
became officers' courses like that in the other
branches, those were qualifying courses for
promotion. Anyone who didn't go through that
course or pass that course didn't get promoted. So
you could see the motivation that attended. That
was a very great aid to me, of course, in the very
beginning.
It also was a problem because there
You would expect standards to be somewhat
different in various ways against two
civilizations, comparing two civilizations,
theirs and ours. But initially, I set the basic
standards for that initial course. And then when
we formed this school, we had to set some of the
norms. And one of them had to do with ensuring that
each officer did his own work.
because he would scramble to be sure he passed and
got qualified for promotion and everything.
Well, those standards that we established in that
first course that I taught were basically applied
to the new thing, and they really had a new set of
standards, too, for conductive classes. And what
were those standards? And that spread.
It required, of course, that an officer be
absolutely above reproach on doing his own work,
whether it was work to be accomplished outside of
the classroom by him, or in the classroom, or on a
test. They just never observed such a standard
seriously before. And I guess the big difference
was this qualifier for promotion. In other words,
you've seen professors that say, I don't care how
you get it, just so you get that information in your
head. But when you're grading this fellow against
that one for purposes of promotion, it's got to be
different than that. It's got to be very strict.
They had not had that strict standard. Another
standard we had was that a very important means of
instruction is the demonstration.
In their military academy or
And the standard was that a poor demonstration is
worse than no demonstration, and so you'll
rehearse the demonstration out on the side of the
students as many times as necessary to make it as
near perfect as you can expect it to be. That's
something they'd never really heard of. Another
standard was that no class would be conducted
without appropriate aids to instruction,
basically graphical aids. The various means of
instruction, the least effective is the lecture
because of the inability of our mind to record
words.
If you see something done, you're going to
remember more than if you just heard about it. And
of course, if you do it, you're going to remember
much more than the other two combined. So anyway,
those were the kind of standards we tried to get in
there, and it worked. And it spread to the other
schools, because at this point, because of that
misfortune of everybody being grounded in their
fortresses, so to speak, when the president was
assassinated, except the artillery corps, we got
a head up in the scene. How'd you get along with the
Venezuelan soldiers? How'd the American army and
the Venezuelans get along? We got along fine. And I
think our training mission, I forget how many
officers we had. We had, it seems to me, about 20
officers, 20-odd officers in that mission, and a
corresponding number of non-commissioned
officers. And we were spread out advising the
various branches and the various headquarters.
We got along well. I will say this, though,
speaking of differences.
In the Venezuelan Army, the personality
of the person makes a lot more difference than it
does in our Army. I mean, you know, we're
accustomed in our Army to accepting a leader or a
cohort
based on the way he operates and what he gets
accomplished. But the personality is more
important there.